# credit-card-approval-rate
The dataset used for this project was obtained from Kaggle, the data set contains credit application records where each row represents a unique customer. The primary objective was to identify key variables influencing the likelihood of credit approval. The target variable name is Status, it indicates whether an application was approved (1) or denied (0). The identified key variables and the selected model could potentially be used to streamline pre-approved credit application processes. Initial data exploration revealed that the dataset is highly imbalanced, with few observations of credit card denials. This imbalance posed a risk of misleading model interpretations and certain variables could potentially appear statistically significant due to limited variation among rejected applicants. Other effects of highly imbalanced data include biased selection of variables and model overfit. To mitigate this, both predictive performance and business relevance were taken into consideration to select the final variables in the model.
The dataset contains twenty-seven thousand observations and includes features such as gender, marital status, family size, assets, income, debt, education, job type, years of employment, and indicators of asset ownership. Business intuition and industry practice indicates that debt levels, income type and job type are considered key variables in determining credit approval. The major limitation of this data set is the lack of enough rejected applicants with over 99% of total rows resulting in Approval. Another technique we used to solve for the imbalance data was Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE). Unlike simply duplicating rows, SMOTE leveraged distance-based measures to generate synthetic data by interpolating between closely related rows. This ensured better representation of the minority class without introducing redundancy into the dataset. Other problems included the lack of other key variables such as FICO score, used in industry practice to determine credit approval. Each variable underwent thorough preprocessing using Python to ensure the data is ready for modeling. One key step in processing the data was to use one-hot-encoding to transform categorical variables into binary indicators. The variable processing included: 1) Evaluation for data completeness and outliers, 2) Assessment of categorical variable cardinality, 3) Variable clustering to group similar categories by risk level and simplify model interpretation.
To select candidate variables, correlations against the target variable were performed. In addition, the decision tree was used as a validating step to identify key variables based on the decision node splits. Variable importance for the Neural Network model indicates that Total Good Debt is the most influential variable, contributing over 40% of the model’s predictive power. Education Type and Job Type are the next most important variables in the model with 20% predictive power respectively. Multiple model types were tested and assessed using metrics like accuracy, lift, and AUC across training, validation, and test partitions.
The Neural Network model was selected as the final model due to its strong and consistent performance across all data partitions and different thresholds.The model achieved a total accuracy of 99% and an accuracy of class 1 (approvals) of 99% in both the validation and testing datasets. For class 0 (rejections), the model demonstrated an accuracy of 87%. Analyzing class 0 accuracy was critical to minimize false negatives, given that most models already exhibited high accuracy for the approval class. Additionally, the model achieved a lift of 1.044 and an AUC exceeding 99%. The performance metrics for the model suggest perfect discrimination power which is highly influenced by the low number of rejected observations. The selected model variables emphasize business intuition and statistically significant relationships with the target variable to ensure the model aligns with the objectives and intended use. Due to the low number of rejected applicants in the data set, it is recommended that the model undergoes periodic retraining when new data becomes available for applicants not approved. A feedback loop would also help to allow auditors to reject or accept model results, improving performance over time. Moreover, the selected model should be used in conjunction with human intervention based on certain risk guidelines.
